# About
This is a personal learning project where I implemented a [CDCL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-driven_clause_learning) based [SAT solver](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SAT_solver) from scratch in Python. 
The goal was to understand how modern SAT solvers work and to learn how to implement them.

For parsing logical formulas, the project also implements a [recursive descent parser](https://www.cs.rochester.edu/u/nelson/courses/csc_173/grammars/parsing.html) for propositional logic. 
In addition to checking if a given formula is satisfiable, the CDCL solver also builds a [resolution proof](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resolution_(logic)) if the formula is not satisfiable.
As an application of the SAT-solver, the project includes a Sudoku solver.

The file `documentation.pdf` gives a more detailed explanation of the theoretical background and implementation details of the CDCL algorithm that we implement here.

# Features
Implemented features of the CDCL algorithm:
- Unit propagation with [2-watched literals](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n3e-f0vMHz8)
- 1-UIP clause learning
- non-chronological backtracking
- a resolution proof engine

Some missing features that might be implemented in the future: decision heuristics (e.g. VSIDS), clause deletion, restart strategies.

# Benchmarks
This is mainly an educational project.
The solver is not intended to compete with highly optimized solvers.
However, here are some benchmarks with random instances. 
In each test, the solver solved 100 random CNF formulas where each clause had 3 to 10 literals.
Clauses are generated by first choosing uniformly at random the size of the clause (within the selected bounds), and then choosing uniformly at random that number of literals from the selected number of variables (allowing literals to appear multiple times in a clause).
Total runtime is the runtime for 100 instances.
The tests were run on an M1 Macbook Air.

| Clauses | Variables | Total runtime for 100 instances           | SAT/UNSAT
| --------|-----------|-------------------------------------------| --------------------------| 
| 1000    | 50        | 8.022s                                    | 29 SAT, 71 UNSAT
| 1100    | 55        | 19.759s                                   | 40 SAT, 60 UNSAT
| 1200    | 60        | 36.087s                                   | 28 SAT, 72 UNSAT
| 1300    | 65        | 68.127s                                   | 34 SAT, 66 UNSAT




# Basic usage
To check the satisfiability of an arbitrary formula, run `python3 main.py formula '<formula>'` where `<formula>` is the given formula (see below for the syntax of formulas). 
For example: `python3 main.py formula '(a -> b) & a -> b'`

To check the satisfiability of a CNF (conjunctive normal form) formula given as a DIMACS CNF file, run 
`python3 main.py cnf <file>` where `<file>` is the name of the file (see below for more about the file format). 
For example: `python3 main.py cnf hole6.cnf`

To solve a sudoku, run 
`python3 main.py sudoku <file>` where `<file>` is the given sudoku file (see below for more about the file format).
For example: `python3 main.py sudoku sudoku_example.txt`

To test the solver with random instances, run
`python main.py test`.
The default test is to solve 100 random CNF formulas, where each instance has 1000 clauses, 50 variables and clauses have 3 to 10 literals.
These settings can be changed in the source code.


**Note:** Currently, the program does not check if the given .cnf or sudoku file follow the assumed format.
If the given files does not follow the assumed format, unexpected behaviour might occur.

# Installing/Running
Download all files into the same directory and run your Python interpreter with arguments as shown above. The only dependency is the standard Python library.

# Syntax of formulas
When giving propositional formulas as input, the following syntax is assumed.
- Variables can be any alphabetic characters **except** `v`, `T` and `F`. To create longer variable symbols, a string  can be enclosed inside square brackets, e.g. `[some text]`.
- The letter `T` is used for the atomic formula "True", and `F` is used for the atomic formula "False".
- Logical connectives are:
  - `<->` equivalence (if and only if)
  - `->`  implication (if then)
  - `v`   disjunction (or)
  - `&`   conjunction (and)
  - `~`   negation (not)
- Formulas can be grouped with parenthesis `( )`.
- The following precedence is assumed (from lowest to highest): equivalence, implication, disjunction, conjunction, negation, parenthesis. For example, `a -> b <-> ~c v a & b` is parsed as `(a -> b) <-> (~c v (a & b))`.
- The binary connectives are left-associative. For example, `a & b & c` is parsed as `(a & b) & c`.

Some examples of formulas: 
- `[it has rained] -> [ground is wet] <-> ~[ground is wet] -> ~[it has rained]`
- `(A -> T) -> (~A -> F)`
- `(A <-> ~~A) -> [unconstructive!]`
- `[X = 100] -> [X != 101]`

If the given formula does not match this syntax, a scanning/parsing error is raised and the first occurrence of an error is highlighted.

For example, `python3 main.py formula 'a -> b & <-> c'` outputs 
```
Parsing error!
Expected '(', VAR, '~', 'T' or 'F' but got '<->' instead. 

a -> b & <-> c  
         ^  
```
# DIMACS CNF files
When given a DIMACS CNF file, the file is assumed to follow the following format.
- Each line starts with either `p`, `c`, `-` or a digit.
- Lines starting with `c` are comments, and lines starting with `p` are the "problem lines" that record, for example, the size of the problem. Lines starting with `c` and `p` are optional.
- The other lines represent clauses. Each such line consists of integers separated by spaces where the integers represent literals. Positive integers represent variables and negative integers represent negations of variables.
- Each clause line ends with a `0` representing the end of the clause (these are not strictly necessary in this project).
 In this project, **each clause needs to be on one line** and **no two clauses can be on the same line**.

The file `hole6.cnf` shows an example of such a file, which was take from [here](https://people.sc.fsu.edu/~jburkardt/data/cnf/cnf.html).

# Sudoku files
When given a sudoku file, the file is assumed to be a plain text file that uses the following format.
- The file has exactly 9 lines and each line has exactly 9 characters.
- Each character is either `.`, which represents an empty square, or a digit `1-9`, which represents the fixed number in the corresponding square.

The file `sudoku_example.txt` gives an example of such a file.


# Resolution proofs
See the file `documentation.pdf` for more details not explained here.

When a propositional formula is given, an equisatisfiable CNF formula is first computed (the so called Tseitin set).
There, each subformula of the original formula is given a new variable (an integer) and from those variables a CNF formula is computed.
If the computed CNF formula is not satisfiable, a prompt asks if the user wants to see a resolution proof of the unsatisfiability of the CNF formula (and hence a proof of the unsatisfiability of the original formula).
If the user answers `y` the program prints the labels for each subformula, the Tseitin set and a resolution proof ending in the empty clause.

For example, with `python3 main.py formula 'a & (a -> b) & ~b'` we get 
```
Starting CDCL with 6 variables and 12 clauses
Formula is not sat
Print proof (y/n)?
```
Typing `y` then prints
```
Subformula labels:
1: ((a&(a->b))&~b)
2: (a&(a->b))
3: a
4: (a->b)
5: b
6: ~b
Tseitin set:
[1]
[-1, 2]
[-1, 6]
[1, -2, -6]
[-2, 3]
[-2, 4]
[2, -3, -4]
[-4, -3, 5]
[4, 3]
[4, -5]
[6, 5]
[-6, -5]
Resolution proof from preprocessed clauses:
0: 1         Original clause
1: -1 6      Original clause
2: 6         Res(1,0,1)
3: 2 -1      Original clause
4: 2         Res(3,0,1)
5: -6 -5     Original clause
6: -5        Res(5,2,6)
7: 3 -2      Original clause
8: 3         Res(7,4,2)
9: 4 -2      Original clause
10: 4        Res(9,4,2)
11: 5 -4 -3  Original clause
12: -4 -3    Res(11,6,5)
13: -3       Res(12,10,4)
14:          Res(13,8,3)
```
The resolution proof consists of a sequence of clauses, each on its own line. 
The comment at the end of the line shows whether the clause on that line is one of the original clauses of the CNF formula, or if the clause is obtained via resolution from clauses earlier in the proof.
The comment `Res(i,j,k)` means that the clause on that line is obtained by resolution from clauses on lines `i` and `j` with respect to the variable `k`.

If the input formula has atomic formulas `T` or `F` as subformulas, these subformulas are not given labels and hence appear as such in the Tseitin set.
Before running the CDCL algorithm, as preprocessing, we remove all clauses with `T` in them and remove `F` from every clause.
In addition, we remove duplicate literals from clauses, we remove duplicate clauses, and we remove all tautological clauses, which are clauses that contain some literal and its negation.
The resolution proof is computed from this preprocessed set of clauses.

Similarly, when a `.cnf` or a sudoku file is given and the formula/sudoku is not satisfiable, a prompt asks if the user wants to see the resolution proof.

**Note:** The resolution proofs can be quite long. 
For example, the CNF formula in the file `hole6.cnf` is not satisfiable and the proof has 4604 lines.
The lines in the proof are padded with spaces so that the comment column is aligned.
If the clauses in the proof are very long, the output may not be as readable.



# References
- https://users.aalto.fi/~tjunttil/2022-DP-AUT/notes-sat/index.html
- https://people.sc.fsu.edu/~jburkardt/data/cnf/cnf.html
- https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~zkincaid/courses/fall18/readings/SATHandbook-CDCL.pdf
- https://kienyew.github.io/CDCL-SAT-Solver-from-Scratch/
- https://craftinginterpreters.com

